DANA 44 F+R AXLE SWAP FOR 1987-1995 JEEP WRANGLER YJ'S

For a significant increase in axle strength from the stock Dana 30 and Dana 35 axles used in these Jeeps, the Dana 44 is a common upgrade. To avoid the expense of custom built housings, Scout II axles are a cheap donor alternative.  The advantages are higher spline count / larger diameter axle shafts, larger ring gear (8.5" on the Dana 44), large 3/4 ton u-joints on the front axle shafts, multitude of ratios and traction aiding differentials. Other side notes are large brakes and bearings, more serviceable front bearings manual locking hubs, 5 on 5.5" bolt circle wheels. 

This project was carried out on a 1994 Wrangler to see how feasible the swap is, financially and technically. Thus the project was dubbed "Project YJ Research and Development" last winter when it began.  The Jeep had a 4.0 HO 6 cylinder, 3 speed automatic trans, conventional spring under axle configuration. Sway bars and tracbars were discarded. The suspension used was stock CJ rear springs at all 4 corners.

Anyone who knows me from the Jeep-L or Jeep-Tech knows I like HD parts and swaps, reliability, commonly available parts and low buck tech! I also have the benefit of a good used parts (junk?) supply, a garage to work in and a good array of tools including torches, grinders, welder. 

The shopping list and the tech: 
Scout II  Dana 44 front axle assembly hub to hub, 1976-1980 disk brakes, open knuckle. Unmodified, the spring pads line up perfectly in the YJ frame.  A Jeep wagoneer Full size or J-10 front Dana 44 from 1980+ looks like another good candidate for owners wanting to keep their NP231 transfer case. However the Wagoneer is a 6 bolt wheel pattern.  
Expect to pay $100-$300+ per axle depending on condition / location. 

Scout II Dana 44 rear end. Complete hub to hub with gear ratio to match front. This is a center diff rear end which is actually slightly narrower than the stock Wrangler axle. Move the spring pads out to match the YJ spring spacing. Set the pinion at an angle parallel to the t-case output with an angle finder. Center the housing side to side and weld the pads to the housing, I used a stick welder. 

Dana 300 transfer case from a 1980-1986 AMC Jeep CJ if going with a Scout front end to get the right hand drop front drive shaft. Now the warnings: This may only work with an automatic trans. Wrangler. The Dana 300 is 23 spline input, it worked perfectly with the 1994 4.0, 3 spd automatic setup I had. I am told the Dana 300 does not bolt up to the AX-15 5 speed due to interference with the trans case casting. The bolt pattern was however slightly rotated from how the t-case bolt up in a CJ. This ends up giving the benefit of more driveshaft clearance on the trans. pan, but you will have to do some significant cutting and re-strengthening of the skid plate. The skid plate also needs to be notched to clear the driveshaft.  Some "corrective" bends in the shifter positioned it nicely in the passenger compartment. Slight modification to the shifter cover over the trans tunnel area and a new shift boot, either CJ dana 300 or Dana 20 to finish it off. 



Now the advantages of the Dana 300 : Cast iron case, gear driven, respectable 2.62:1 low range, non-slip yoke rear output, shorter case length than NP 231, twin stick available with no internal mods. Disadvantage : need to pull rear driveshaft to flat tow since the case will not lubricate itself unless driven or modified with  paddle wheels on the sliders inside. 

New driveshafts:  Driveline lengths will change with all of the above changes. I found some from a CJ7 6 cylinder, 5 speed that lined up perfectly with a 1-2" lift kit also in place.

Tie rod, steering arm to steering arm from a Scout, along with Scout ends if using Scout steering  knuckles. 

Pitman Arm, from a CJ, slightly longer than the YJ for a better turning radius.

Drag link, there is an application out there from an early Bronco that works, I don't have the part numbers. I had the proper tap so I chose to shorten a CJ tie rod (not drag link) to span the distance from the pitman arm to the TOP ( the way the Scout is tapered) of the right side draglink. A CJ or YJ tie rod end for the pitman arm side, a Scout tie rod end for the steering knuckle end to match the larger taper than a CJ or YJ. 

New u-bolts : the housing tubes are bigger than the YJ axles. The ubolts on the right (diff)  side front are huge, they go over a portion of the casting. 

New spring plated or u-bolt skid plates. Scout or Full size Jeep to match the large spacing of the Dana 44's ubolts. A good time to upgrade to ubolt skids from Currie or Tomken, just order them for Dana 44's or the spacing will be off.

New parts : Check all of the following wearables, front and rear : calipers, wheel cylinders, brake linings, wheel bearings and seals, ball joints, front rotors, locking hubs, wheel studs.

Caster shims :  I shimmed the Scout front in Project YJ R+D 6 degrees. There is still some wander that I attribute to worn tires. The fat end of the shim faces forward, the pinion gets shimmed DOWN for positive caster. The Scout is built with 0 or slight negative caster. If you are really ambitious, go to Jim Weed's Scout page on Off-Road.com and follow the instructions for cutting and turning a housing, a lot of work. 

New rear spring pads : $18.00 from summit. New ones may be easier than trying to salvage the used one for the rear end. The pads must be moved out on the rear to match the YJ spring centerbolt / frame width. 

YJ emergency brake cables will work with the Scout backing plates.

YJ rubber brake line and tee for the rear axle can be reused. You will probably want / have to bend up new steel lines to each wheel cylinder.

U-joint u-bolts : another built in upgrade the dana 44's offer. Try to salvage the ones on the donor axles. Consider the same style yokes for the dana 300 instead of straps.  The u-joint size is a "1310" the same as CJ and YJ. 

New wheels,  YJ is 5 on 4.5",  Scout is 5 on 5.5". Wheels from a Jeep CJ, Scout, Ford and Dodge 1/2 ton 5 lug will all work. Be sure the wheels have a large enough center hole to go over the locking hubs in the front. The large amount of offset the YJ wheels have will not be needed since the Scout axles are actually narrower.

Front end alignment : a tape measure can set your toe in to about 1/8". If it drive straight and doesn't wander, caster and camber should be within spec. Caster will end up being less than the YJ had from the factory, I've heard rumors of 6-9 degrees being normal for these. 

Exhaust : The header pipe from the manifold out will have to be cut about 6-8" from the O2 sensor and removed since it crosses over to where the dana 300 and front driveshaft now reside. I moved the catalytic converter and muffler to the drivers side of the frame, had a transition piece from the end of the factory header pipe to the cat inlet, and a tailpipe made by a custom exhaust shop. Cost was about $100. I think there is a slight performance increase with this system also since some restrictive bends are removed. 

All of the required mods and tech are listed with the components above. Some foot notes are a slight decrease in turning radius due to the longer am section of the Scout steering knuckles. The caster vs. Pinion angle may be an issue with larger lifts, I am still fine tuning this one to get rid of wander. I would consider a front Dana 44 with more caster from the factory next time, such as the Full size Jeep axles. But hey, this is why it is a "Research and Development" project! Also, brake pedal travel was excessive with the YJ booster and master. I ended up with a 1982-1986 style CJ booster and master cylinder assembly  and now have a nice high hard pedal. My theory was the YJ master cylinder lacked enough capacity to fill the larger calipers and wheel cylinders of the Scout axles.

Bottom line, I think it is a great upgrade, and makes the YJ frame more desirable to the custom Jeep builder since you get a true bolt in Dana 44 front swap. Would I do it again? Sure, but not on a Jeep to resell! Much time and effort was put into this swap, and opportunities to sell this Jeep were lost since I was wrenching on it still. On top of that, most of the prospective buyers don't know what a Dana 44 is! This swap may not be for everyone, but the alternatives are $1300-$3000+ custom built housings from the likes of Currie, Dynatrac and TriCounty gear. I'm sure many of the same nickel and dime parts and unknowns exist with these swaps also. 
