Update on my Pro-Jection system:

     So far everything has been great. It's been eight months since I first installed the Pro-
Jection and I have been very happy with it. I have gotten everything I expected, but I went in
search of a little better gas mileage and tweaking tips. I called Holley and spoke with Jimmy
who is their main guy on the Pro-Jection kits. He gave me a few things to check fix and assured
me it would make a great difference. First of all I asked him about the closed loop kit option that
could be added on. He told me that this is not a cure for problems, rather a fine tuner. It doesn't
affect choke operation or anything above 3/4 throttle. I decide than to work on the other things
he told me and forget about the closed loop kit right now. He said the most important thing to
the operation of the unit is a properly functioning 195 degree thermostat. Since I had never
changed/checked mine when I swapped motors this is where I started. When I got inside, I found
out I had a 180 thermostat, so I got a new 195 and installed it. One by product of this was much
better heat in the truck. I also seems to cool better as well. Second is to check the TPS (throttle
position sensor). It needs to be at 0.68 volts at idle. Mine was set at .73 so I adjusted it. The
adjustment involves loosening the mounting screws ans rotating the sensor sightly until the
desire voltage is obtained across the black and dark blue wires. After this, the truck ran smoother
at idle. Last but not least was to check the fuel pressure. He said for this application to set it at
13 lbs. I installed a fuel pressure gauge in line since there is not test port and discovered that my
fuel pressure was at 10 lbs. By turning the screw on top of the regulator at the throttle body I was
able to obtain the 13 lbs. reading. So, you ask, how did all this affect performance/driveability?
Well, I got everything back together and took it for a spin. I though it ran good before, but now
it's even better. It starts easier than before, and the power is dramatically increased, especially
off-idle. I just filled up right after making these adjustments, so if I can keep my foot out of it, I
expect better mileage. Hopefully this helps anyone who may read this article and install the kit.
As before, feel free to email me with any questions you may have.

From: Jeff Wilson [mailto:jwilson@shore.intercom.net]
Sent: Wednesday, October 22, 1997 8:38 PM
To: dgray@off-road.com
Subject: Re: Holley Pro-Jection review I wrote


Here is the tech stuff. The attached file is called pjtech.txt. If you want
a picture of my fuel pressure gauge setup I installed let me know and I'll
take one and email it to you. I finally got a scanner, so I can scan them my
self now.

Jeff Wilson 82 CJ-7 -- 258 w/Pro-Jection
jwilson@shore.intercom.net
http://www.intercom.net/user/jwilson/jeep.htm
member, Eastern Shore Jeep Association


